---
layout: post
title:  "Final Evaluation's Post"
date:   2018-08-12 20:22:00 -0500
categories: update
---

# What did I do

My original goal that I proposed to my mentor Chris is stiffness detection and
automatic switching algorithms for `Ordinarydiffeq.jl` and tooling for
`ModelingToolkit.jl`. I have completely finished my first goal. There is a
working set of algorithms in `OrdinaryDiffEq.jl` for unknown stiffness
problems, as shown in
[here](http://docs.juliadiffeq.org/latest/solvers/ode_solve.html#Unknown-Stiffness-Problems-1)
Here are some PRs that I made regrading stiffness detection and auto switching
for both `OrdinaryDiffEq.jl` and `StochasticDiffEq.jl`:
  1. [Stiffness detection for `Tsit5` & `DP5`](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/275)
  2. [Add the max norm estimation for the largest eigval on `Rodas5`](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/282)
  3. [Implement a basic strategy to switch from `DP5` or `Tsit5` to `Rodas5`](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/287)
  4. [Add a strategy to switch from `Rodas5` to `DP5` or `Tsit5`](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/289)
  5. [Performance fix](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/294/files)
  6. [Add an option to let stiff methods to perform first](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/29://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/296)
  7. [Clean up the switching algorithm](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/297)
  8. [Add stiffness detection for Verner's methods](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/299)
  9. [Change default ODE algorithms to automatic switching algorithms](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/DifferentialEquations.jl/pull/272)
  10. [Fix the error in `Rodas5` when using `BigFloat`](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/301)
  11. [Make stiff methods other than Rosenbrock compatible with switching algorithms](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/323)
  12. [Refactor stiff solvers](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/342)
  13. [Refactor the calculation of `W` matrix](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/StochasticDiffEq.jl/pull/75)
  14. [Add eigenvalue estimation for `SOSRI2` and `SOSRA2`](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/StochasticDiffEq.jl/pull/77)
  15. [Make the properties of `CompositeAlgorithm` consistent](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/322)
  16. [Refactor `calc_W!` to always return a boolean](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/314)
  17. [Add a method to compute the length of the stability region](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/DiffEqDevTools.jl/pull/6)
  18. [Refactor implicit solvers (1)](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/StochasticDiffEq.jl/pull/80)

I did not work on `ModelingToolkit.jl` much, as Chris assigned Dream Scatter
(@chakravala)[https://github.com/chakravala] to work on `ModelingToolkit.jl`
instead because of [this
issue](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/ModelingToolkit.jl/issues/62).
Nevertheless, I implemented some macros for variable declaration and the
transformation from a high order ODE to first order ODEs. Here is the
collection of PRs for my work on `ModelingToolkit.jl`:
  1. [Add some macros to make defining variables easier](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/ModelingToolkit.jl/pull/30)
  1. [Doing function registration through `DiffRules.jl`](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/ModelingToolkit.jl/pull/37)
  1. [Implement conversion to first-order ODEs](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/ModelingToolkit.jl/pull/40)
  1. [Add a transformation for ODE order lowering](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/ModelingToolkit.jl/pull/51)

I then work on multi-step methods in Nordsieck form, as they are very
well-known methods in `SUNDIALS` and `OrdinaryDiffEq.jl` did have them. Here
are the relevant PRs:
  1. [Add a fifth order Adams method in Nordsieck form](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/327)
  2. [Add higher order derivatives for `Tsit5`'s dense output](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/336<Paste>)
  3. [Refactor & optimize `AN5`](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/367)
  4. [Implement `JVODE_Adams` algorithm](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/369)
  5. [Clean up Nordsieck methods](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/397)
  6. [Add `JVODE_BDF` algorithm](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/439)

After working on solvers in Nordsieck form, Julia 0.7-alpha was released, so I
worked on upgrading many packages in `JuliaDiffEq` to Julia 0.7 and Julia 1.0.
Here are the relevant PRs:
  1. [`OrdinaryDiffEq.jl`: Bump REQUIRE to 0.7-alpha](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/392)
  1. [`OrdinaryDiffEq.jl`: Fix SSPRK test error](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/431)
  1. [`OrdinaryDiffEq.jl`: Fix some depwarns](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/444)
  1. [`OrdinaryDiffEq.jl`: Add `parse(BigFloat, ...)` back](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/453)
  1. [`OrdinaryDiffEq.jl`: Use MuladdMacro v0.2.1](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/454)
  1. [`OrdinaryDiffEq.jl`: Compatibility with Julia 1.0-rc](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/473)
  1. [`DelayDiffEq.jl`: 0.7 compatibility](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/DelayDiffEq.jl/pull/72)
  1. [`DelayDiffEq.jl`: Fix depwarn in `HistoryFunction` Tests](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/DelayDiffEq.jl/pull/77)
  1. [`StochasticDiffEq.jl`: 0.7 compatibility (1)](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/StochasticDiffEq.jl/pull/90)
  1. [`StochasticDiffEq.jl`: 0.7 compatibility (2)](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/StochasticDiffEq.jl/pull/92)
  1. [`BoundaryValueDiffEq.jl`: Fix depwarns](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/BoundaryValueDiffEq.jl/pull/38)
  1. [`DiffEqSensitivity.jl`: Fix depwarns in Sobol Method tests](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/DiffEqSensitivity.jl/pull/22)
  1. [`DiffEqBase.jl`: Bump REQUIRE to 0.7-alpha](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/DiffEqBase.jl/pull/110)
  1. [`DiffEqBase.jl`: 0.7 compatibility](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/DiffEqBase.jl/pull/115)
  1. [`DiffEqBase.jl`: Compatibility with Julia 1.0-rc](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/DiffEqBase.jl/pull/130)
  1. [`DiffEqBase.jl`: Fix plotting on Julia 1.0](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/DiffEqBase.jl/pull/134)
  1. [`DiffEqDiffTools.jl`: Fix all depwarns for Julia 0.7](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/DiffEqDiffTools.jl/pull/36)
  1. [`DiffEqDevTools.jl`: 0.7 compatibility (1)](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/DiffEqDevTools.jl/pull/8)
  1. [`DiffEqDevTools.jl`: 0.7 compatibility (2)](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/DiffEqDevTools.jl/pull/9)
  1. [`DiffEqDevTools.jl`: WIP: Fix depwarns](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/DiffEqDevTools.jl/pull/10)
  1. [`DiffEqDevTools.jl`: 0.7 compatibility (3)](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/DiffEqDevTools.jl/pull/11)
  1. [`DiffEqDevTools.jl`: Fix depwarns in `analyticless_stochastic_wp.jl`](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/DiffEqDevTools.jl/pull/13)
  1. [`DiffEqDevTools.jl`: Compatibility with Julia 1.0](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/DiffEqDevTools.jl/pull/15)
  1. [`DiffEqNoiseProcess.jl`: 0.7 compatibility](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/DiffEqNoiseProcess.jl/pull/10)
  1. [`DiffEqProblemLibrary.jl`: Use submodules (this is to fix precompilation time)](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/DiffEqProblemLibrary.jl/pull/27)
  1. [`DiffEqProblemLibrary.jl`: Fix CI error](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/DiffEqProblemLibrary.jl/pull/28)
  1. [`DiffEqProblemLibrary.jl`: Make DiffEqProblemLibrary repeat safe](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/DiffEqProblemLibrary.jl/pull/29)
  1. [`DiffEqProblemLibrary.jl`: `srand` -> `Random.seed!`](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/DiffEqProblemLibrary.jl/pull/32)
  1. [`RecursiveArrayTools.jl`: Fix `any`'s ambiguity on Julia 0.7](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/RecursiveArrayTools.jl/pull/37)
  1. [`RecursiveArrayTools.jl`: Bump REQUIRE to 0.7-alpha](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/RecursiveArrayTools.jl/pull/30)
  1. [`DiffEqOperators.jl`: Compatibility with Julia 1.0-rc](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/DiffEqOperators.jl/pull/71)
  1. [`mauro3/Parameters.jl`: Compatibility with Julia 1.0-rc](https://github.com/mauro3/Parameters.jl/pull/68)
  1. [`symengine/SymEngine.jl`: Compatibility with Julia 1.0-rc](https://github.com/symengine/SymEngine.jl/pull/138)

`JuliaDiffEq` also had an interface update, too. It happened roughly at the
same time with Julia 0.7/1.0 migration. Here are some PRs that address interface changes:
  1. [`DiffEqBase.jl`: Refactor `SplitFunction`](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/DiffEqBase.jl/pull/116)
  1. [`DiffEqBase.jl`: Refactor `DynamicalODEProblem`, `SplitFunction` and `SecondOrderODEProblem`](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/DiffEqBase.jl/pull/11://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/DiffEqBase.jl/pull/119)
  1. [Use a tuple for DynamicalProblem's mass_matrix](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/DiffEqBase.jl/pull/11://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/DiffEqBase.jl/pull/121)
  1. [Fix method redefinition warnings](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/DiffEqBase.jl/pull/11://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/DiffEqBase.jl/pull/122)
  1. [`OrdinaryDiffEq.jl`: Remove `prob.f<:Tuple` checks](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/435)
  1. [`OrdinaryDiffEq.jl`: Fix errors in partitioned methods tests](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/436)
  1. [`OrdinaryDiffEq.jl`: Fix test failure in `Scalar Discrete Problem`](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/437)

I then worked on more flexible nonlinear solvers in `OrdinaryDiffEq.jl`.
`OrdinaryDiffEq.jl` used to only have Newton solver in implicit Runge-Kutta
methods. Although that covers most of the use cases, it is nice to to cover
cases where users do not have a very stiff problem and functional iteration
solver can be used. Here is a list of relevant PRs:
  1. [Refactor `diffeq_nlsolve!` to make it more modular](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/442)
  1. [Add a functional iteration solver to `diffeq_nlsolve!`](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/445)
  1. [Improve functional iteration](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/448)
  1. [Simplify functional iteration](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/449)
  1. [Restructure nonlinear solvers](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/451)
  1. [`nonlinsolve` -> `nlsolve`](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/477)
  1. [DiffEqDocs.jl: Document NLNewton, NLFunctional, NLAnderson](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/DiffEqDocs.jl/pull/145)

## Miscellaneous Pull Requests
  1. [`OrdinaryDiffEq.jl`: Refactor ROCK2](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/441)
  1. [`OrdinaryDiffEq.jl`: Clean up SBDF](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/470)
  1. [`OrdinaryDiffEq.jl`: Implement the `ABDF2` method](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/303)
  1. [`OrdinaryDiffEq.jl`: Change `ABDF2` coefficients to the FLC form](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/306)
  1. [`OrdinaryDiffEq.jl`: Add event handling compatibility for `AB/ABM` methods](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/309)
  1. [`OrdinaryDiffEq.jl`: Clean up the "Interface" test group](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/357)
  1. [`OrdinaryDiffEq.jl`: Optimize and clean up `VCAB3`](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/OrdinaryDiffEq.jl/pull/348)

# Post GSoC work
`NLAnderson` nonlinear solver is not finished yet. I plan to implement an
Anderson acceleration solver after this GSoC project. Also, `JVODE` solver is
not very robust. I suspect that it is caused by step-size controller. After
this I hope that I can make the current implementation of `JVODE` robust.
