---
layout: post
title:  "Second Evaluation's Post"
date:   2018-07-09 15:52:40 -0700
categories: update
---

In the last few weeks, I have been working on upgrading `OrdinaryDiffEq.jl`'s
code to Julia 0.7. As Julia 0.7 has many language changes, the upgrading road
is not very smooth. I am going to write some notable changes that have
significant influences on `OrindaryDiffEq.jl`.

# `DiffEqBase.jl`
`DiffEqBase.jl` changed a lot. Chris did the modification that deprecates
overloading derivative functions directly. Instead, we are now using a more
structured, type based `DiffEqFunction`.
```julia
struct ODEFunction{iip,F,Ta,Tt,TJ,TW,TWt,TPJ,S} <: AbstractODEFunction{iip}
  f::F
  analytic::Ta
  tgrad::Tt
  jac::TJ
  invW::TW
  invW_t::TWt
  paramjac::TPJ
  syms::S
end
```

# Deprecation of `zeros(A)`
The use of `zeros(A)` is deprecated in Julia 0.7. `OrdinaryDiffEq.jl` used
`zeros(rate_prototype)` in almost all mutable caches' initialization, and they
needed to be changed to `zero(rate_prototype)`. However, fixing this is very
easy by using regex.

# Deprecation of `Vector{T}(N)`
Similar with the `zeros` deprecation, fixing this just a simple transform of
`Vector{T}(N) -> Vector{T}(undef, N)`.

# Broadcasting
They are not used directly by `OrdinaryDiffEq.jl`, but they are still very
essential. In Julia 0.7, we can now fully broadcast every RK method, because
there is no performance loss that is mentioned in
[here](https://github.com/JuliaLang/julia/issues/22255#issuecomment-306814370).
We can now make all the RK methods run on GPUs now!

# Iteration Protocol
The change of iteration protocol didn't influence `OrdinaryDiffEq.jl` much, and
that was [a very easy
fix](https://github.com/JuliaDiffEq/RecursiveArrayTools.jl/commit/c7c29e0d3f629f1bc197bf5325a3a370fd5a8e7f).

# `norm` & `opnorm`
While `OrdinaryDiffEq.jl` uses `norm` a lot, there are not many place that
`opnorm` should be used expect for exponential integrators and stiffness
detections. I didn't get involved in this much, as
[@MSeeker1340](https://github.com/MSeeker1340) did most the work here.
